add automating-cis-compliance blog post (#1583)
kyverno/website: content/en/blog/general/automating-cis-compliance/index.md

---
date: 2025-06-11

> title: Building CIS EKS Compliance Automation with Kyverno

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Automating EKS CIS Compliance with Kyverno and KubeBench
```

> linkTitle: Building CIS EKS Compliance Automation with Kyverno

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: Automating EKS CIS Compliance with Kyverno and KubeBench
```

author: Yugandhar Suthari
description: A practical approach to implementing CIS security controls using CNCF cloud native tools.
---

## Introduction: The Challenge of EKS Compliance at Scale

> Maintaining CIS Amazon EKS Benchmark compliance across multiple clusters is a common challenge in cloud native environments. Traditional manual approaches don't scale, and existing solutions often lack comprehensive coverage or real-time enforcement capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintaining CIS Benchmarks compliance for Amazon EKS across multiple clusters is a common challenge in cloud native environments. Traditional manual approaches don't scale, and existing solutions often lack comprehensive coverage or real-time enforcement capabilities.
```

> This article explores a practical approach to automating CIS EKS compliance using Kyverno (a CNCF Incubating project for Kubernetes-native policy management), combined with OpenTofu for infrastructure provisioning and validation and kube-bench for node-level CIS scanning. This solution demonstrates how CNCF ecosystem tools can work together to provide comprehensive security validation across the entire infrastructure and application stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article explores a practical approach to automating CIS compliance for EKS using Kyverno (a CNCF Kubernetes-native policy engine), combined with OpenTofu for infrastructure provisioning, and kube-bench for node-level CIS scanning. This solution demonstrates how CNCF ecosystem tools can work together to provide comprehensive security validation across the entire infrastructure and application stack.
```

### Challenges with manual approaches:

- **Scale limitations**: Manual processes don't scale across multiple Kubernetes clusters
- **Time-intensive**: Comprehensive audits can take days per cluster
- **Error-prone**: Human oversight can miss critical security configurations
- **Reactive nature**: Issues discovered weeks after deployment
- **Inconsistency**: Different teams may interpret controls differently
- **Cloud native complexity**: Traditional tools don't understand Kubernetes-native resources

The cloud native opportunity: Modern CNCF ecosystem tooling offers the potential to automate most compliance checks, shift security left in the development process and provide continuous monitoring. The key is leveraging CNCF technologies that work well together and understand cloud native patterns.

## The Multi-Tool Cloud Native Approach to Complete CIS Coverage

Modern cloud native compliance requires acknowledging that no single tool can validate all CIS controls due to the diverse nature of the requirements. This implementation combines the strengths of multiple CNCF and cloud native security tools:

![Architecture Diagram](./cis-exec.png)

> - **Kyverno** (CNCF Incubating): Kubernetes-native policy engine for runtime validation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Kyverno** (CNCF Incubating): Kubernetes-native policy engine for IaC pipeline and runtime validation
```

- **kube-bench**: Community-standard CIS compliance scanner for node-level validation

> - **OpenTofu**: Open-source infrastructure-as-code for plan-time validation

Reviewer: This makes it seem like OpenTofu is performing validations. Should we clarify that its using Kyverno for plan time validations?

*Note: This implementation has been thoroughly tested using KIND clusters and is available for community experimentation and contribution.*

**File:** [opentofu/compliant/main.tf](https://github.com/ATIC-Yugandhar/cis-eks-kyverno/blob/main/opentofu/compliant/main.tf)

```hcl
resource "aws_eks_cluster" "main" {
  name     = var.cluster_name
  role_arn = aws_iam_role.eks.arn
  version  = var.cluster_version

  vpc_config {
    subnet_ids              = aws_subnet.private[*].id
    endpoint_private_access = true
    endpoint_public_access  = false  # CIS 5.4.2 compliance
  }

  # CIS 2.1.1: Enable comprehensive audit logging
  enabled_cluster_log_types = ["api", "audit", "authenticator", "controllerManager", "scheduler"]

  # CIS 5.3.1: Encrypt secrets with KMS
  encryption_config {
    resources = ["secrets"]
    provider {
      key_arn = aws_kms_key.eks.arn
    }
  }
}
```

### Step 2: Plan-Time Policy Validation (Shift-Left Security)

> Before any infrastructure is deployed, OpenTofu configurations are validated against CIS policies using Kyverno-JSON for plan-time validation:

Reviewer: Is there a reason why we used Kyverno-JSON and not the CEL based ValidatingPolicy?

Both will work, but one advantage of using ValidatingPolicy is that the same policy can be used for JSON payloads and Kubernetes resources. This makes it easier for users to maintain the policies.

**File:** [policies/opentofu/monitoring/cis-2.1.1-enable-audit-logs.yaml](https://github.com/ATIC-Yugandhar/cis-eks-kyverno/blob/main/policies/opentofu/monitoring/cis-2.1.1-enable-audit-logs.yaml)

```yaml

> apiVersion: json.kyverno.io/v1alpha1

Reviewer: See comment above on the new [ValidatingPolicy](https://kyverno.io/docs/policy-types/validating-policy/) type which works for JSON and K8s.
